Hello, everybody.
Welcome back.
And let's get started.
And I'd like to introduce our
next speaker for introduction
to WebObjects Tools,
Stan Jirman.
And joining him will be Tom Naughton.
Hello, everybody.
Welcome to Introduction
to WebObjects Tools.
I'm Stan Jiurman.
Soon,
Tom will be joining me here up on stage.
What will you learn?
Well,
that actually depends quite a lot on you,
how much notes you will be taking,
whether you're going
to fall asleep or not.
I'm going to try to not
make you fall asleep.
We'll be talking here
about the WebObjects tools.
What are the tools used to
build WebObjects applications?
And we'll show you how to
build a very basic application.
How many of you have been here,
this usual poll,
how many of you have been
here for the 7.01 session,
the introduction to WebObjects?
Most of you.
Okay,
so you had the humor for the week and
probably a lot of this will be repeat,
but there will be some new stuff.
We'll be talking about
the WebObjects Tools.
What are the WebObjects Tools?
We have Project Builder.
Project Builder is the same as
is used by CoreOS for all the
Carbon and Cocoa applications.
We have WebObjects Builder.
We saw that in the
previous session as well.
EOModeler.
We will not get too much
into EOModeler here.
There will be an advanced session that
will discuss EOModeler in great detail.
We will not be talking about the
EO Bean Builder and the Rule Editor.
It will be discussed in other sessions.
First, we will start with an
introduction to EOModeler.
What is an EOModel?
What does it do for you?
And why should you be using it?
Then we'll get into the
project builder introduction.
This will be a project
builder introduction from
a WebObjects perspective.
There was a project builder
discussion or show before in
the development tools track.
We'll examine the resources,
we'll compile a project,
and we'll launch an application.
Then we will get into the
WebObjects builder introduction.
We'll be editing components,
we'll be showing you the
path view for HTML selection,
and we'll show you binding validation,
which is a very powerful
and useful feature.
and we will be doing everything on
the example of a common web app.
We have a real estate app where if
you're in the market for a house,
you're probably familiar with that.
You shop online what
house you would like,
then you check the price,
especially here in the Bay Area,
you'll find out you can't
afford it and you're frustrated.
So, first we'll start with eModeler.
They put those two things
so close together this year.
You know, last year we had people running
up and down the stage and so
they wanted to cage us in.
And it's really difficult to see things.
So first eModeler, what is it used to?
It manages an eO model.
Enterprise objects, short EOs,
they are Java objects which
represent records in a database.
EO modeler manages the EO model,
which is the mapping
between the database,
which is not object-oriented,
and your Java application, which is,
hopefully.
It provides persistent
data store connectivity.
It maps this data, as I said,
and it also defines relationships.
Oops, excuse me.
That's one too many.
EOModeler provides persistent
data store connectivity.
Each model...
Each model is used in WebObjects
application to connect to
a specific data source.
You can have multiple models in
one WebObjects application also.
It maps native data types into
Java types because database
types are not necessarily
clearly mapped into Java types.
So here you see varchar becomes a string,
and becomes a number.
It maps data into objects and there's
usually a one-to-one mapping between
a table column and an EO attribute.
It creates templates for you so that
you can plug in special getters,
setters,
and code validation or data validation.
And it hides the whole middleware.
The EO model is just the
little tip of the iceberg,
the part that, especially when you're
starting out with WebObjects,
that's the only part that
you need to deal with.
There's the whole stack of
the two enterprise objects,
frameworks, EO control, and EO access.
And that's hidden,
and that does all the work for you.
So basically the EO Modeler
provides a layer of abstraction
that minimizes the cost of change.
So when you change the database,
you actually just adjust a few settings
in EO Modeler and your application
continues working because that's the
whole abstraction layer and the rest of
your application should not know anything
about the database that's being used.
Now I would like to welcome Tom on stage.
He will show us EOModeler.
Tom, thank you.
Thank you, Stan.
Tom really loves EOModeler here.
Oh, yes.
Everyone loves EOModeler here.
Yes.
I'm just going to show you some basic
things that you'll use EOModeler for.
If you're starting out and
you already have a database,
the first thing you'll need
is a model so that you can
start using the EOF framework.
And EOModeler has a nice assistant
that will reverse engineer
that database into an EOModel.
And this is always the standard
beginning EOModeler demo.
So first you choose the
adapter that you're going to
use to access your database.
Then you need to enter the URL.
And here this is the special time
that we saw in the previous demo.
We are actually using stickies to
write WebObjects applications as well.
Yes.
Stickies is the demoer's crutch.
It avoids typing in public.
which can save one a lot of frustration.
There are various options that you
have in the assistant that helps
you reverse engineer your database.
For simplicity,
we're just going to go with
the basic default options.
Just click finish here.
And now it runs out,
it accesses the database,
it finds all the rows and tables,
and it figures out what the entities are,
what the relationships are.
It maps their types to Java types
and creates this model for you.
The next thing we can do is
take a look at some of the
things we have in the model.
This is the real estate example that
you're going to see quite a lot.
If we look at a listing,
you'll see that there's attributes
for things that you would expect
to find about a house for sale.
For example, the bathrooms, the price,
the size of the yard,
the size of the house.
And there's a relationship to a user
who's the agent who listed this house.
Next we can take a look at objects
in the database by clicking on
the database browser button.
This brings up
Just some tables from the
database so that you can make
sure that your model is working,
make sure that you're
connecting to the database,
and make sure that the values in the
database are pretty much what you expect.
Another thing that you'd probably
want to do next is maybe add some
custom business logic to your objects.
The way you do that is you generate
Java code for some of these entities,
the ones that you want to
add custom behaviors to.
First, we save the model.
When you save the model,
EOModeler does a consistency check.
It looks and makes sure that
everything is kosher in its opinion
and gives you a list of things that
might be problems down the road.
I don't really agree with it here.
What did you screw up this time, Tom?
It doesn't like that something
is using the name description,
so whoever designed the database
is in fact the one who screwed up.
Oh, okay.
But it's not really a problem.
All the demos work,
and it's not my fault.
So we're just going to save,
give it a name,
save that in the home directory so
that we don't mess up other demos.
And then you click on
this little Java button,
and it wants us to specify a class name.
It's recommending we use
listing because we're generating
Java for the listing object.
I'm just going to go ahead and do that.
All right.
[Transcript missing]
I could, let's see,
actually I meant to do
this on the user object,
but we've done the listing object,
and I was going to add a method
to get the full name of a user,
but let's say we wanted a method
that returned the total number
of bedrooms and bathrooms.
Let's see.
Total rooms.
That probably won't work.
What's that?
Total rooms.
Yeah, but I'm running into this
number of class issues.
Here, let me just do it as
I originally planned,
because I don't want to
embarrass myself excessively.
Go back here, choose the user object.
Users are down here.
Click to generate Java, use user, save,
and the home directory will be fine.
Go down here to user Java,
where we in fact do have methods
for getting a first and last name.
In there somewhere.
You could also just find it.
There you go.
So first name, and we've got last name.
And we wanted to add a
method for the full name,
which I have here in stickies.
This is why I wanted to
use this particular object,
because I could just base the code in.
Nice blue palm.
Yes, there we go.
Very visible.
So there we go.
So now we have an additional method
that produces a derived attribute
of the full name of the user.
Now, you might want to do something like,
when you set the name, you could...
You know,
make sure that you don't have someone
else with the same name that conflicts,
maybe unique things.
You could, when you create a new user,
you could make sure that each customer
is assigned an agent or other various,
you know, business logic type things.
So then the last thing
I wanted to show you.
So let's say you started with a
brand new database that you just
designed here in your modeler,
and you want to hook it up to
Oracle and have it generate all
the tables and rows for you.
You could write readings of SQL,
or you could just have
your modeler do it.
You click here, and you specify that,
you know,
I want to create and drop tables,
and I just basically just want
to do everything to create the
entire database from scratch,
and this is all the
SQL that would do that.
And if I went ahead and executed that,
it would delete everything
out of the database,
and the rest of the demos
wouldn't do anything.
So I won't do that right now.
But anyway, that was just sort of a quick
overview of what you use your
modeler for and how it works,
and how it works for you
and how you work for it.
Yeah, especially the last part.
Thank you, Tom.
Just stay here with us.
Yeah, I'll sit right down here.
So let's go back to the slides.
So much for EModeler.
We will now turn to Project Builder.
Project Builder, what is Project Builder?
Project Builder is the IDE for
all WebObjects 5 applications.
You use it to manage your resources,
your static data, images,
and also dynamic components such
as actually EO model files are
considered database dynamic elements.
Now in WebObjects 5 we introduced
this new no longer bucket scheme.
Until then we had those buckets that
all classes had to be together and all
WebObjects components had to be together,
et cetera.
Now you can have stuff
all over the place.
Now if I can take a quick poll,
who likes this new style better?
Raise your hand if you
like the new style better.
And for just because maybe
people don't know the difference,
who would like the old style better,
the buckets, like all classes together
and all Java components,
I mean web components?
Nobody.
You see,
we improved the product big time.
Project Builder allows you
to edit and debug the code.
It builds whole
applications or frameworks.
And it also allows you to
launch and actually be active
in the debugging procedure.
Project Builder has two
kinds of assistance that
are specific to WebObjects.
There is the project assistance
and there's the file assistance.
First, what do the project
assistance do for you?
They help you with completely
new project creation.
They create, build,
compileable skeleton applications.
So whatever comes out of a project
assistant is completely compilable.
It doesn't do much, but it compiles,
which is already a plus.
And those assistance allow you
to add basic resources to the
project and also your models.
Then we have file assistance.
File assistance are used for
when you already have a project,
you are editing a project,
and you want to add new files to it,
such as Java classes,
such as web components,
and Java client NIPS.
Since Tom is already camping out here,
why not use his time?
Get rid of modeler.
We'll not save this time.
And the sticky.
We don't need stickies anymore.
So I'm going to take the database that
I showed you in the last example and
show you how quickly you can just take
that and generate a working HTML-based
application using one of the assistants.
So we're going to make a new project.
Let's go all the way down to the bottom.
You get a list of all the
WebObjects assistants.
There's a variety.
You can create an EOF application
that uses Cocoa and Java so that you
can have all the functionality of
EOF and then a nice Cocoa interface.
We have a bunch of
direct-to-star technologies,
we call them.
There are lots of other
sessions that cover that.
But basically they allow you to
sort of dynamically configure
your application as it's running.
And the one I'm going to show you is
kind of an old-fashioned type of example.
It generates just an HTML page that
you then take over and make pretty.
So it's called a display
group application.
A display group is an object that manages
a bunch of objects from a data store.
So, for example,
it could paginate a long list of data.
You could say, you know,
I just want to have ten per page and it
will automatically handle going to the
next page and showing the next group.
And it does searching and lots
of other handy things for you.
So we're just going to
call this demo or dem.
Demo or dem.
We'll put it in tem.
No sticky for that, Tom?
No, no.
It doesn't really matter.
It's not important.
Oops, okay, and I just passed.
We're not going to deploy it as a J2EE,
on a J2EE-enabled server.
We're not going to vend
or consume web services.
We're going to use the JDBC adapter.
And we're going to add a framework
that contains the real estate
model and uses the real estate
database that I showed you.
This framework also has a lot of
business logic already added for the,
for the,
for the Java real estate database.
Now, Steve, in the session before,
he was showing a
relevant demo for Canada.
This will be a very relevant demo,
or the rest of the session
will be very relevant to the
Bay Area to get you familiarized
with the Bay Area house prices,
et cetera.
So.
And Stan and I took all these pictures.
Yes.
Which you'll see.
So it found the model that was inside
the framework and listed in the models.
We could add additional models and
it would use them all together.
Next, then it's opened the model and
found all the entities within it.
We're just going to display a
bunch of attributes on a listing.
We get to choose the
layout for our HTML page.
I'm going to do a table and
I want to be able to search it.
So I'm going to have some query fields.
And I just wanted to
show all the attributes,
I guess.
That was a shift click to
select everything and then
just drag them all over.
And I'm not traversing relationships
because I just want to show these.
Now we choose the
attributes for the query.
I'm just going to be able to
search on number of bedrooms,
number of bathrooms, selling price would
have to enter a range,
which would be a lot more complicated.
And what else?
I wanted to search on the address
so that we can look for houses in
San Jose and houses in California.
That should be good enough for a demo.
Click finish.
It makes a project with a web component.
Start that building.
It added the framework
down here in frameworks.
A few Java classes.
So very soon,
Internet Explorer will pop up.
I'll show you the application.
OK, so it basically gave us--
it's got a form with the query
attributes that I asked for.
And it's got a table down here that's
currently just got the headers.
So we're going to search
for houses in California.
I guess that's probably
going to be all of them.
And it's not a very pretty table,
but you can go ahead and beautify that,
pass it over to the artist,
have them draw some pretty pictures,
and make an appealing interface for it.
So that was just an example of a project
wizard that'll just get you started
along the road of building your project.
We also have some file wizards,
which we'd use to add
resources to existing projects.
So, for example,
if we wanted to add a Java class,
we go down here to WebObjects
Java class and give it a name.
is able to type.
And it just adds that to your project.
You can actually
customize these templates.
They're just in the project
builder extras folder,
which you can find out all about in
one of the project builder sessions.
So if your company has your
own company header and you
commonly include other packages,
you could add that to templates and
save yourself a little bit of work.
That's it?
That covers assistants.
I think the basic point here is,
as Tom showed,
the resulting application is maybe
not the prettiest application,
but let's face it,
most people on the planet,
they are much more at ease with
designing a web page to make it beautiful
than with talking to a database.
And that's exactly what those
frameworks are all about,
and those tools help you to
do-- get the hard stuff done.
And us programmers, at least many of us,
are really not that good with
beautifying web pages either,
but we can outsource that, right?
There we go.
So, okay.
The next thing is project
structure in Project Builder.
I already touched on that.
That has changed quite a lot between
the old WebObjects project types
and the ones that we introduced
in WebObjects 5 just a year ago.
The project structure in
Project Builder is target oriented.
and it's just a modified version
of the OS X normal build system.
It's a quite substantially
modified version,
but nevertheless it's
basically the same foundation.
For those of you who are not familiar
with the build system of WebObjects,
what is a target?
A target defines which files
are parts of a particular
component of a build product.
One file can be part of
multiple such subproducts,
such targets.
For instance,
there's Java components for clients that
are both on the server and on the client,
so they will be part of
both or multiple targets.
This is typical deployment scenario.
We have an application server.
We have a web server.
I would like to point out that these
are probably some old Solaris servers.
Of course, as of next week, today,
you will be able to buy those nice,
what Steve showed, this little thing.
New Apple branded servers.
Then we have a firewall.
And then comes the big old intranet
with nice and not so nice clients.
We have the web server target.
It was the first machine up there.
The web server serves the static data.
The static images, static HTML,
like your price list,
client-side Java classes,
Java client Nib files,
and anything that's accessed through
a normal HTML that you could type in,
and when you type it in again,
it will be still the same thing.
On the other hand,
there's the application server target.
That's for all the dynamic content,
such as server-side Java classes,
which are classes that get
downloaded that stay on the server.
Web components that get
dynamically built and they're
displayed in your application.
Images generated on the fly.
One of the biggest examples
for that is iCards.
When you go to Apple's website and
you want to send a cute email with
a nice card to your mom because
it's Mother's Day coming up,
and your models, for some strange reason,
they're considered dynamic.
Now, warning,
do not rename targets and don't really
mess with them unless you really,
really know what you're doing.
It's a dangerous thing.
Tom is more or less the only person known
to man on the planet who can fix them.
If he's on vacation, we're in trouble.
So chances are,
if you go and mess with the targets,
your application will
not get to the better.
So, Tom, we just said your name,
and since you are Mr.
Target, don't drop your mic.
My mic falls to the floor.
Gravity at its best.
And then I stepped on it.
Yeah, let's hope it still works.
Still works?
Still works.
Okay, so targets.
Let's see, we're going to go back to our
DEMP project that we created earlier
and just show you the targets in there.
So as Stan said,
there are two main targets.
Here, let's click on the targets
tab so you can see them.
There's the application server
target and the web server target.
And then one more target
that's kind of the root target,
really just there to build the other two.
But it can be a little misleading
because that's always the default
target that pops up whenever an
add to target panel comes down.
So I always have to remember
when you're selecting targets,
the default target probably isn't
where you want to put things.
You either want to put things on the
application server if it's dynamic and
needs to be part of your application,
or on the web server if it's going
to be downloaded to a client.
So as long as you keep that in mind,
is this going to the client,
does it belong on the web server,
then you'll be able to choose which
target to add your resources to.
So we can click on these targets,
and we get this nice panel that shows
us everything that's in the target.
So the application server has all the
Java classes and component resources for
application and a number of frameworks.
Look on the web server.
There are all the frameworks because each
framework can have web server resources.
And there's a bunch of GIFs that
the assistant put in there for us.
If we'd actually chosen an option to
add and remove records to the database,
it puts nice little
buttons with pretty GIFs,
and it just puts those GIFs
right in your project because
you've chosen that project type.
So another way to look at targets
is click on the files tab.
Then you'll notice along the side
here you have a bunch of check boxes.
And the check boxes are turned on
for things that are in a target.
And I just noticed when
I added that Java class,
I put it in the main target.
So that's wrong.
Let's get that out of the main target.
It would actually go in the
application server target.
It's actually a very important thing.
You will see that when you go,
maybe you play with the product down in
the lab or when you play with it at home,
it's really important to
which target you add a class.
You might find yourself, well,
I added a Java file to the project.
I'm building it, but it's not showing up.
Make sure you added it
to the right target,
not to the main one.
Because the main target is just
a wrapper for the other two,
which is the web server
and the app server.
But unfortunately,
PB's interface is to always
default to the main target.
So if you just follow
the default behavior,
it will put it in the wrong target.
Very important to keep in mind.
So this is everything that's in
our application server target.
It's sort of just like the other
target viewer that I showed you,
except it's easier just to turn
the check boxes on and off,
I find.
So take a look at the web server.
And it's like I showed you before.
All of the GIFs are in the main target.
And then you can see that the
main target is the main target.
So this is everything that's in
our application server target.
It's sort of just like the other
target viewer that I showed you,
except it's easier just to turn
the check boxes on and off,
I find.
All of the GIFs are in the web server
because they need to be downloaded
over HTTP and all of the frameworks,
except for a few that we added.
For example,
the JDBC adapter doesn't need
to be on the web server because
no one's going to download your
adapter for talking to the database.
So it just goes in the
application server target.
Anyway,
this should give you an idea of what
goes in which target and how you can move
something from one target to another.
Well, thank you, Tom.
Sure, Stan.
You don't even need to sit down
because this will be just one
slide before you do the next demo.
One picture says more
than a thousand words,
so we'll let you do the magic soon.
Let's get to WebObjects Builder.
We saw already a demo of WebObjects
Builder in the previous session,
and we'll see now another one.
What is WebObjects Builder used for?
For editing of HTML,
binding of HTML objects to your project,
the dynamic connections,
integration with your model,
of the EO model into your HTML pages,
and it integrates with Project Builder.
So both applications,
Project Builder and WebObjects Builder,
are talking to each other to
synchronize the IVARs and method
names that might be around.
So let's go straight to the meat,
and Tom,
show us about WebObjects Builder.
Okay, so for this demo,
we're gonna build an extremely simple,
brand-new WebObjects application.
We need to start with
the assistant again.
And this time I just used,
down at the bottom,
WebObjects application.
That's the most vanilla template
that you can start with.
Choose that, give it a name,
we'll call this demo two, or DEMP two.
We're not going to do
anything terribly fancy,
so we'll just go with all the defaults.
It builds us this project and
this default web component,
which we're going to open in
So the builder is basically a
cross between an HTML editor
and a code browser.
Up at the top there's the toolbar,
which is mostly for HTML editing.
There's a range of buttons
for HTML text styles,
some buttons for HTML elements
such as tables and links and lists.
Then there are form elements,
text entry fields, submit buttons,
et cetera.
And then there are dynamic elements,
which are things that are going to
actually be changed at run time.
Like you just put
placeholders into your HTML,
then the WebObjects framework actually
figures out what belongs in there.
So our app is going to be very simple.
It's going to ask you for your name
and then tell you what you entered.
So it just basically shows you how to do,
how to get data from a web page and
how to stuff it back into a web page.
So since it's going
to ask for user input,
we need a form.
So we make a form and
then give it some text.
What is your name?
Add a text field and a Submit button.
So when they enter their name,
we want to put that somewhere.
So we're going to add
a key to our component.
And it's going to be a string,
call it the name.
That's a good name.
It's just going to add
an instance variable.
We could have it add getters and setters,
but we'll just go with
the instance variable.
And then we just drag connect that to
our text field and say that's going
to be the value of the text field.
So when they click submit,
it's going to stuff whatever they
typed into there into our IVAR.
Then when they click submit,
an action has to occur,
so we're going to add an action.
So the action will be
called name entered.
This is kind of a convention
that it always ends in action.
And then you could have it
return another component,
or if you just enter another,
it will return the exact same component.
So we'll do that just
to make this simple.
And we want to show the final result,
but we only want to show the name if
they actually have entered a name.
So we're going to add a conditional,
bind that up to the name.
So if there is a name,
then we'll say hello, helloee.
Hello, and then add a string.
Hello, the name.
It'll put the name in there.
And did I wire up the submit button?
Let's look in the
inspector and see if I did.
I did not.
Okay, and you'll notice some of
these attributes are in red.
And that's why I'm trying to tell
you that you've done something wrong.
Corresponding with that,
there's this validation panel.
This icon actually changes color when
there is a problem with your component.
And it's saying that we need to bind.
There's a variety of ways that
you can bind an action class.
The simplest is to just
bind an action to it.
And it's trying to tell us that,
you know,
according to its validation rules,
this isn't going to work.
So we just drag connect
this up to submit,
bind it to action, and then all the
validation errors go away.
So in theory, when I build and run this,
it should work.
So I'll go back to project builder,
go and run.
Hello, Tom.
So that just basically shows you
how we built an HTML component.
We added dynamic elements.
We didn't really write very much code.
Wob wrote all the code,
and the code is very simple.
It's a view source file.
And we see that it added
the I-bar for the name,
then it added an action.
This is sort of the absolute simplest
WebObjects program that you could have.
Other things we might want to do
would be return a different component.
We would do that here.
And we could set up the component.
We could stuff values into it if we
wanted to have multiple components
and pass arguments between them.
So I hope that gives you an
idea of how you use the builder.
and the rest of the team.
Thank you.
So, this is the WebObjects field.
It's just an open and
closed WebObject tag,
and it just has a name which points
to its bindings in the WAD entry.
This is called the WAD file, dot W-O-D,
for WebObjects definition,
in case you thought it might
refer to anything else.
And these are all WAD entries.
So, if you wanted,
you could just edit the
text files this way.
You could even do it
from Project Builder.
For example, if we twist this open,
you can see, you know,
here's the HTML page.
Here's the WAD entry
and here's a WOO entry,
which holds the encoding for
the component when you save it,
or it can also hold information
about display groups if you've
added them to your component.
So let me just show you a few more
things you can do in ROM mode.
Just to point out, these are two files.
There are some other products
that maintain everything in the
HTML file with special tags.
We have it split up into two files.
So it's a somewhat cleaner approach,
as Steve pointed out before.
And, uh...
WebObjects Builder
maintains both of those,
plus the woo file.
So instead of having Java code embedded
in your HTML and having to sort through
the HTML mess and then the Java mess,
it basically just points to the
Java file and keeps everything separate.
I'm gonna try and reformat
this a little bit.
It'll probably just move the
body tag down there for me.
So that doesn't help very much.
Let's add a table.
There's a little table
assistant that comes up.
You can tell it, you know,
maybe you want four by four columns.
I believe this still works in ROM.
There we go.
So it's added a table.
And I can hit that command R to reformat.
It will indent that in the
proper location where it belongs.
And the reason I add the table
really is just to show you this nifty
feature that we have for tag matching.
So if I double click on this tag, it,
you know, selects that tag.
If you triple click, whoops,
it's going to
It'll go and select to
the tag that it matches.
And then if you start dragging,
it'll select the containing tags.
And as you drag further,
it selects that containing tag
and further in the body tag.
So it's a very easy way to go ahead
and match up a bunch of embedded tags.
Do you also want to show the selection?
The selection preservation?
Okay.
Well,
another thing that can be a pain when
you're editing HTML is to find the range
of text in the raw HTML that corresponds
to the range of text in the WYSIWYG HTML.
And while there's a nice feature,
if I just select name here,
then switch back to GUI mode,
it'll select name there.
And if I wanted to find this table
cell in raw mode for some reason,
you just select the table cell.
And yes, that's the path view,
which I'll show them in a minute
So, and then it selects the table cells.
So it's very easy to go from one mode
to the other and not lose your context.
So here's another element
that Stan was pointing out.
This is the HTML path view.
It's similar to some other HTML editors,
but just basically shows you
the containment hierarchy from
the selection all the way up
to the root of the document.
So sometimes, you know,
if you have this table and you
wanted to select just the table row,
it's kind of hard to do that in GUI mode,
but it's very easy to
do with the path view.
You just click right on the parent
element that you wanted to select.
Do you have any questions about that?
No, no, I mean... I guess we'll
take questions at the end.
Yeah, I guess we will.
Okay, so much for the demo
of WebObjects Builder.
Thank you, Tom.
Next is rapid turnaround mode.
Again, this is something that we
saw briefly mentioned before.
Rapid turnaround is something
that was introduced a while ago.
It improves the development time,
your whole experience,
because you don't need to
do a full install build just
to test your application.
So you save time this way.
There's no need to
perform a split install,
as I mentioned,
and it allows you to tweak
HTML components and some other
components as the application is running,
so you don't even need to
restart the application.
No rebuild and no restart
of the application.
And images you can change.
That's one of those other
dynamic components which
you can replace on the fly.
And you do not need to run a web server.
It means you really can use the whole
box or your development machine for
running and testing the application.
Project Builder needs to be running.
We saw before that Project Builder
and WebObjects where they communicate
with each other through special means,
and they both need to be
running for this to work.
Project Builder is...
like the big overseer of
this whole development mode.
Of course,
when you're using rapid turnaround,
chances are you are in Project Builder
to edit your code or to start
and stop the application,
so that's not such a big deal.
Tom, it's your name again.
And show us a little bit
about the rapid turnaround.
Sure, I have a lot of demos,
so let me get out of... And also
you have to show the nice
houses that we took pictures of.
Yes, now you get to see the houses
that we took pictures of.
There you go.
So I'm going to open up a new
example that we've been working on.
It's called iShax.
And it has a lot of components.
Okay,
and I'll just build and run that for you,
just so you can see what
the application looks like.
And we'll just run it because
I've already built it.
We built it before.
[Transcript missing]
So I came logged in and it goes,
you know, sort of to my home page.
And this is my agent and
these are properties that she
suggests I take a look at.
She's more than just your agent.
She's more than just an agent.
So also once you log in,
there are other options that show
up in the toolbar on the side
for selecting a different agent.
God knows why I would want to.
Or changing your personal information,
etc., etc.
Let's just take a look at a few of
the houses that she's recommended.
So here's a condo in a
very cramped condo area.
There are maybe three
feet between each condo.
So I'm not very interested in that.
And I took that picture and
I wasn't really happy with
how the light was falling out.
Yeah, it's kind of the shadow is
too harsh down in front.
But, you know, the condos around it,
you know,
had their garage doors open and it
wouldn't have made as good a picture.
Anyway, so this is an installation.
This is an instance of the listing entity
that I showed you earlier where you have,
you know, the number of bathrooms.
There's a relationship to the picture,
etc.
So what I want to do, though,
is -- let's go back to my home page.
There are a few things that I don't
like about this application.
I'd just like to change the
appearance a little bit.
And using WebObjects and
Rapid Turnaround mode,
it's easy to go ahead and do
that while the application is
running just using the builder.
So let's first go to that home page.
I really feel all of
this should be centered,
the agent stuff,
the picture and the name,
and then the option to
choose another agent,
just center that in that table.
So just to show you
how you would do that,
that's all in the homepage component.
Open that up.
I'll make it big so everyone can see.
So, I don't know, it's kind of,
you'll get used to deciphering
what all this means,
but this component is all contained
within a layout component.
That has the header
component at the bottom,
there's a footer, and the component with
all of the options.
But right here we have,
this is a woe image of the agent,
and I'm just going to go
over here to center that.
And these are all inside of a table cell,
so I can't just select them all
and center them at the same time.
I have to center each individual cell.
Select her name,
and then select this option
to change to another agent,
and center that.
If I can get the mouse over there.
I save this, and I just go back to IE.
I don't have to rebuild or anything.
I just hit refresh,
and everything just updates right away.
So that's a very handy way to go
ahead and you can change colors,
you can change your HTML.
Another thing I'd like to change
is this user logged in message.
I originally had that up as part
of a large banner up at the top,
and I think I'd like to just go
ahead and put it back that way.
So let's go find out where the header is.
So you can see this entire component is
embedded within this layout component.
So if I double click on that,
it brings out the layout component.
And there's an option to render
the HTML inline as it would
actually appear in the page.
I believe that's here.
There you go.
Display components is rendered HTML.
That makes it a little easier to
figure out what component this was.
Then you see this user logged in stuff.
Okay, yeah, that was another component.
That's the header component.
I need to double-click to open that.
And then now I can edit this.
And so let's say I wanted
to remove this stuff.
I'm going to get that out of
there and stick it in here.
Oops, and I actually need
its container as well.
Because this is only supposed to show
up if the user is in fact logged in.
There.
OK, save that,
and let's see what I've actually done.
So I hit refresh,
and I've broken something.
Great.
I put all of this outside of the
table that I wanted to put it within.
So let's select this table.
- This works in rehearsal.
Okay, here, let's just put this back
where it was at least.
I'm watching him on there.
All kinds of things going on today.
Okay, well, I've horribly broken it.
Well,
let's just imagine your name is up there.
Let's just imagine that
I put that over there.
We are actually demoing
on an alpha system,
so this is unreliable.
I know, I know.
I'm finding excuses for you, Tom.
But it is alpha software.
We're doing it on alpha software.
It's an alpha builder.
Right, yeah, it's really, really.
But I think you get the general idea.
If you're good at editing HTML,
you can make all kinds of changes.
You don't have to
rebuild your application.
You can change functionality.
You can have things hide and show.
And you just hit refresh in the browser,
and you can make all kinds of refinements
to your app in very little time.
Show us some more houses.
Some authentic Bay Area houses.
A few other houses.
You want to look at some houses?
So another one that she recommended.
Here's a nice duplex.
If you want to live in a house
connected to another house.
You can also search for houses.
Trash days on Monday.
So which one?
I don't know.
Search for houses in San Jose, maybe?
Just to show you what the app does.
Ooh, I like the top one.
It's nice.
Ooh, somebody.
Stan took this one.
Yeah.
They had a lot of trash, I guess.
It was trash day.
Okay.
All right.
Anyway, I think we've made the
rapid turnaround point.
Yeah, more or less.
Yes.
Let's go back to the slides
for the last chapter.
[Transcript missing]
Back to the slides.
Thank you.
The last part of the presentation will be
about CVS integration in Project Builder.
We'll discuss what is CVS and what
can it do for you in WebObjects.
I guess, how many other people are
here OS X developers of some
other kind in WebObjects?
And do you use CVS?
Do you like CVS?
Do you like the CVS integration in PB?
Yeah?
Okay, so for those of you who
don't know how it works,
this will be about CVS integration in PB.
There are some particular features which
are useful for us WebObjects people.
What is CVS?
Well, first of all,
It stands for concurrent
versioning system,
which allows multiple people to
concurrently work on the same version.
of the source file.
It's open source,
which is a really big thing with Apple,
it seems.
And we really stand behind it that
it's not owned by some big evil empire.
It comes with OS X,
so if you get the developer CD,
CVS comes pre-installed as
part of the developer system.
It is cross-platform,
which is very important for us WebObjects
people because we have development
both on Windows and on MacOSX,
and therefore we need a cross-platform
integration with a persistence,
I mean with a CVS.
It's command line only.
Now that is a good and
a bad thing for some.
It's a good thing.
It seems to be getting a good thing.
I mean,
even Steve is showing off terminal and
transparent things running in terminal.
So that is definitely a good thing.
Sometimes it gets to
be a little bit tricky,
though, when you have to do a complex
operation like dealing with wrappers,
with directories.
At that point,
you don't necessarily want to
deal with command line only.
So we have a solution for that.
And Apple loves it and
uses it internally.
All of Apple's OS X and all
the projects used in it,
they are maintained through a CVS system.
What does Project Builder
do to help you with CVS?
It shows you little marks next to
files when you show--when you add,
delete, or rename a file.
It actually can help
you rename those files,
which is especially
important when you have,
again, folders, so-called wrappers.
It supports deletion of such files.
When you try to do it
on the command line,
chances are the first five times you will
fail and give up frustrated and go after
the CVS repository and delete it there,
which is not the point.
Project Builder can do that for you.
It allows remote CVS servers,
which is a part of how it supports
security so that you don't actually have
the direct access to the CVS server.
Maybe your employees who are
not so experienced don't have
direct access to the CVS server.
They can go and rename and change files.
you have to go through the server itself,
which is an added security.
So Tom, Tom once again,
show us about CVS.
There's a similar issue with my legs.
Yeah, just stop.
I think it's like crossing my legs
and then it goes around the leg.
I don't know what you're
doing behind there.
But this is the last demo?
That's the last demo.
And I won't have to think about
demos for a long time again?
About a year.
A year,
I'll begin to think about demos again.
So let's look at this project from
Project Builder that I've been modifying.
I believe I made some modifications
to the toolbar component.
which is
Here it is, the toolbar component.
So we twist that open,
the localized English version
of the component.
And the little m's aren't showing up.
So we'll make sure that we
have CVS integration turned on.
Here, maybe I didn't save the component.
[Transcript missing]
and you see that it's put
this little M next to the file
because it's been modified.
So we can go to the CVS menu
and see exactly what I've broken
by choosing compare with base.
Then it's going to launch file merge.
- So, well, it's kind of hard to see in
here exactly what I've done
because it just shows the entire,
table cell in one line.
But basically you can use this to
review the changes that you've made
before you go ahead and check them in.
And if you left a
component horribly mangled,
you can revert to the latest revision.
and that should fix it in theory.
So go back to here and hit refresh.
And there we go.
Everything is back the way it was.
No harm is done.
CVS has saved me.
Want to give it another try, Tom?
Give it another try?
No.
We'll do it again next year.
Okay.
Next year we'll just move that
little piece up into there.
Next year it will be much better.
Yeah.
But anyway, so it's very convenient to
use CVS from Project Builder.
It shows you exactly what you modified.
I guess I wasn't terribly
risky in this demo.
I didn't modify a whole lot of things.
I believe I changed
the agent detail page.
No,
that was the home page that I changed.
The home page.
So what if you want to
rename one of those files?
If I wanted to rename one of those files,
well, traditionally,
if people have used CVS a lot,
you'd first have to remove
the file from the repository,
then add it again with a different name.
And of course,
CVS won't let you remove the
file until you've deleted it,
so you have to move it aside
and give it a different name.
But Project Builder actually makes
it very easy to rename files.
I don't want to rename that one, though.
We'll rename this one.
We'll call it "The Cookie."
So that goes,
it removes the old one and marks
it for removal in the database,
puts a little R next to it.
It adds the new file that we've changed,
and it's a whole lot easier than
doing it via the command line.
You'll also notice when I bring
up the inspector for the file,
there's a list of all of the commit
messages for all the modifications
that have been made to this file.
So let's take a look at another file.
This one shows you all
the commit messages that,
these are the actual commit messages
that we've had since we started working
on this project about a month ago.
And this is an easy way to get a
high-level view of all the changes
and who's been working on what.
It looks only you've been working on it.
Is there some teamwork on your team, Tom?
Is there what?
Is there some teamwork on your team?
There's plenty of teamwork.
It's Tom and Yuji.
Oh, there you go.
We'll find him at Gala here somewhere.
Well, anyway,
so you can basically see who's been
working on what and what they've
changed and review their changes.
And it's very convenient.
Thank you Tom.
The really nice thing about this is it
really supports also naming of folders
which is even much more of a pain to do
when you're doing it on command line.
Slides.
Slides or not, doesn't really matter.
We're kind of ahead of schedule it seems.
When we rehearsed we were
way over time and somehow...
I think we had longer demos.
Yeah, we had longer demos.
He's a slacker.
So this is our schedule.
There's the WebObjects
lab located downstairs.
Tuesday, today, it just ended.
Okay, there was the porting lab.
It will be open all week
long until Friday 6 p.m.
How many of you are planning to be
in the WebObjects lab on Friday at
6 p.m.? Don't miss your flight.
Okay?
So...
This is the roadmap,
things that we would recommend.
There's advanced data
modeling and connectivity.
That's much more EOModeler work.
EOModeler is one of the more
important tools used for WebObjects,
so you might want to attend
that if you are planning to
get serious with WebObjects.
And of course, the feedback forum,
where we would love to hear from you.
Who to contact?
There's my boss, Tony.
There's Bob, who introduced us.
That's the guy with the hat.
He still has it.
And then there's the consulting part.
For more information,
Go to those sites, other places.
Those slides will be
coming over and over,
so you will see them if not now.
This is new documentation.
How to access the documentation, those...